I am super delighted to welcome Annette
Kay who is uh going to be introducing
and facilitating the day today. So um I
want to actually share a little bit
about Annette um who's such a a dear
friend um and really important leader in
the Lagari community. Um Annette is a
spiritual director, therapist,
supervisor and artist living in the
northeast of England. She is a member of
the spiritual director advisory group
for Lagar and facilitates UK and
European communities.
>> Um her psychedelic journey has brought
her into a closer kinship with the earth
and although she still struggles with
church um she has come back into the
Christian story and felt close uh and um
felt close to that story that she may
have at one point walked away from. I'll
let her share more about that, but I
imagine that resonates with um with a
handful of folks here that um that
psychedelics have helped us root back
into the tradition of our upbringing. Um
so, Annette, I'll turn it over to you uh
to take it away for today.
>> Okay. Thank you, Megan. I'm just doing
doing the co-host job of letting people
in. Um it's really lovely to be here.
Um, this was originally planned as part
of our UK Lagar um, offerings. We meet
once a month on Zoom and we invite
people sometimes to to talk with us. And
uh, I was reading Chris's book and
thought, gosh, it'd be great if he could
come to Lagar. And uh, he's kind enough
to have his email address online. So I
emailed him and he came back immediately
and said, I'd be delighted to. And uh we
had one one false attempt to do this,
but um so we've rescheduled for today
and it's lovely to have you all here. Um
I'm just real I've got some people sort
of blocking my view. I'm trying to move
it. Anyway, here we go.
Um
so in our UK um meetings, we always
start with a little bit of quiet. Um and
I'm going to invite us to do that now.
It won't be more than a couple of
minutes. and then we'll get into Chris
being able to introduce himself and the
conversation that we're going to have.
So, just for a moment, if you settle
yourselves, uh just that little bit more
into your chair, let yourself relax.
Um you've probably all come in from busy
days. Whatever time zone we're in, the
day will have been full of other things.
So, let's just try and be here.
uh be open,
be relaxed, be trusting of what we're
going to hear and participate in.
Uh and I have two snippets of um the
Sufi poets to offer you as as we open
and I'll just leave a little quiet in
between them
um and then we'll get started.
>> Uh Michael,
>> awesome. Thank you. Is the um
>> mic in here?
>> Yeah.
>> If anybody's not muted, could you have a
check and just see that you're muted?
It's a big help. Thank you.
All right. So, into this quiet, I'm
going to drop this um poem by Roomie.
There is a community of the spirit.
Join it and feel the delight of walking
in the noisy street and being the noise.
Drink all your passion and be a
disgrace.
Close both eyes
and see with the other eye.
Open your hands if you want to be held.
Sit down in this circle.
Move outside the tangle of fear
thinking.
Live in silence.
Flow down and down in always widening
rings of being.
So let that invitation come sit in the
circle. Just
enter and become part of you for a
moment.
And then the second one also from a Sufi
poet by Hafi.
Every child has known God.
Not the God of names. Not the God of
don'ts.
Not the God who ever does anything
weird.
But the God who only knows four words
and keeps repeating them, saying, "Come
dance with me.
Come dance."
>> Amen.
>> So Chris, let's dance.
>> Let's dance
>> or dance as you would say over there.
That's true.
>> Yeah.
Um, thank you so much for being here.
Um, and I think a lot of people will be
basically familiar with you and a lot of
people I know have read your book or one
of your books, the one about your LSD
journeys. I know you've written a few,
but I'd really like you to introduce
yourself. How do you like to introduce
yourself? [laughter]
Well, I made my living as a professor of
religious studies teaching in a state
university in northeast Ohio. Was there
for 40 years, taught for 35.
Uh but that work did not is not what
brought me here really. What brought me
here was my hidden underground work uh
working responsibly I hope and
critically with psychedelics.
I was not a clinician or psychologist. I
wasn't interested primarily in the
therapeutic applications of
psychedelics. I was interested in the
philosophical cosmological implications
of these substances. I was trained as a
philosopher of religion. I'm also a
father and uh husband and outdoor
enthusiast
and I grew up in Mississippi and now I
live in North Carolina. So I started
life as a seminarian studying to be a
Catholic priest, [snorts] finished
graduate school at as an atheistically
inclined agnostic. That's what all that
graduate education did for me. And then
I encountered uh Stan Grath and his work
on psychedelics and that was a turning
point in my life.
>> Yeah, that's a good start.
>> Okay, thank you. Um and my the next
thing I want to ask you is really to get
at the core of this conversation um
right at the beginning which is to say
what's when when you come to these
conversations what is it that you most
hope to communicate like what what's the
most alive part of the story for you?
Well, there are many, you know, for
people who are already uh on their own
psychedelic journey, uh there are ways
in which I hope maybe I can help them uh
as from one jourer to another. uh for
people who are on a spiritual journey
but not necessarily a psychedelic
journey. I hope we can share um our love
and fascination with the universe and u
the cosmology that emerges in
psychedelic work which is essentially
the same cosmology that emerges in deep
mystical traditions not new.
Um, I hope
I hope I can be a good uh transparent
vehicle for [snorts]
um bringing the mother's love and the
mother's wisdom into the room.
>> Thank you. So, mother's love and and to
be of service.
>> Yeah. The great mother
>> would be would be would be at the heart.
>> Yeah.
>> To be at in the service of the great
mother.
>> Yes. is is is at the heart of of what
you want to bring to these
conversations.
>> Yeah.
>> And in um uh in the Christian tradition
of discernment,
we we don't ask whether uh an experience
is good or bad. We ask what's the fruit
of it? What's the the felt or relational
impact of it? Um and so I wonder about
that with your your experiences. what
what do you feel has been the the
essential fruit or the the thing that
you're most grateful for?
>> Yeah.
>> Uh and yeah h how have you lived
differently because of them?
>> Well, well, first my journey was a long
journey. I mean, it started when I was
30 years old and I continued working
actively with psychedelics until I was
50 years old. So, it was a 20-year
journey, a long journey with many twists
and turns. And so,
I'd have to isolate particular segments
of the journey to describe how it
impacted me or the journey as a whole,
how it impacted me. I undertook this
journey as a philosopher of religion. I
wanted to understand how the universe
worked. Why is there so much suffering?
What's the fundamental deep structure of
reality? Where is reincarnation taking
humanity? Wanted to understand
reincarnation early on. Um, and I wanted
to know my true self, my true identity
underneath all the psychological and
social identities that we all
accumulate.
And psychedelics gave me use used as I
use them. Uh, gave me the answers to
these questions and the experience of my
reality in that way. And there have been
in these have been incalculable gifts
for me. I have an understanding of life
which I did not have before. I have had
an experience of life which I had not
had before. And I'd have had
transient
experience and repeated experience of my
own uh true nature which I had not had
before. And those are great items of
great value and they've changed the
direction of my life. Uh changed the
orientation. When I finished my
sessions,
>> [snorts]
>> uh spirit said to me in my meditation,
20 years in, 20 years out. And I
thought, oh, that means it'll take me 20
years to assimilate and integrate all
the experiences that I had in this
20-year period. Now I'm past that 20
year point. And uh my book LSD in the
mind of the universe came out as it
turned out 20 years after I ended my
journey. Now I I think that was too
optimistic. Uh I think it will take many
lifetimes for me to really fully
integrate um what I experienced on my
journey.
>> Yeah. I found I found the reincarnation
um bits of your book the most were among
the most interesting bits cuz I've been
you know a good Christian girl and who
for whom reincarnation was a real nogo
area but but it's been coming across my
path from various places more recently
and the way you talk about it I found
really convincing it it kind of really
made sense that that there would be
>> you know We're all these little
individual stories, but actually there's
there's one big story going on.
>> I I came away from your book actually
saying, and it's been my sort of mantra
since then, there's only one thing
really going on.
>> Yeah.
>> And it feels [clears throat] to me like
your reincarnation, it's like the whole
of creation is
>> Yeah.
>> moving. and and I wondered how you found
resonance with things like teard dean
and I'm I'm not an expert but you know
on his idea of evolving towards
the open point isn't it
>> I'm very comfortable I feel a great
kinship with
>> teard dean
>> and you know my first book was actually
on reincarnation
and I there I examine I gather the best
of the empirical evidence for reincarn
arnation and as a philosopher I'd form
the conclusion that the empirical
evidence is overwhelmingly strong. We we
just have to look at it carefully
impassively to understand that this is a
truth. That doesn't tell us what this
truth means. It doesn't tell us we don't
understand so much about reincarnation.
We don't understand how it works, the
dynamics of it, whatnot. But at that
time I was still under the influence of
the religions of the eastern traditions
which tended to see reincarnation as the
story of an individual soul, an
individual progression and deepening of
the soul moving towards ever um deeper
experience of their own true nature,
their enlightened nature, their their
god nature uh and experiencing an
actualization of that nature. But in my
psychedelic path, it emphasized
something different. As you say, it
emphasized that all of our individual
stories are part of a family story, a
species story and that there is an
evolutionary process taking place which
concerns the entire human family. And
particularly at this time in history,
the family story is in a sense the
important story that all of our
individual stories serve and are
participants in this larger evolutionary
tre uh process because I think we're
coming to a turning point in history. At
least that's been what my sessions have
taught me. We're coming into a turning
point. We're coming into a time of
profound spiritual maturation in
history. A very critical point. And I
think we either grow up or we die. And
death is extinction is a powerful
accelerator of our psychological and
spiritual developmental capacities. And
so this is a human story. And I' I've
had visionary experiences where so
profoundly all of our individual lives
were like cells within the body of
humanity. And not only were our
individual lives feeding into the
developmental momentum of of humanity,
but humanity's challenges were also
informing and structuring the karmic
challenges of my individual life. There
was no boundary. My second book, Darknet
Early Dawn, is basically exploring the
fact that ultimately there is no such
thing as private spiritual realization
or private spiritual accomplishment.
that all of us are interpenetrated in
collective dynamics. So in the end as
you say there is only one significant
evolutionary story taking place here and
that's an exaggeration of course because
there are many galaxies and many you
know sons in those galaxies and planets
but on this planet we really are moving
into a critical time for the entire
human family. M
>> well I'm interested in whether you you'd
see that broadening outside the human
family as well into the the whole
planetary system the the the whole earth
system
>> I think so
>> many shamans working with medicines or
not uh many shamans have had deep
experiences of the animal kingdom of the
totems of the intelligence that kind of
integrates all the experiences of a
particular species of animals here or
U and it's interesting my work has has
not my work is really fundamentally
focused on the human species and I've
been asked this by animal advocates and
I'm quite sympathetic and I appreciate
the shamans whose work does and I think
my my work well I've thought about this
a lot and I think the reason my work is
focused on human beings is that the
human race is the greatest threat to
life on this planet. If we can heal the
human race, then all the other species
in the on this planet will be made safe.
Right now that we're extinguishing them
faster than the extinction that brought
down all the great dinosaurs.
>> And most of this is being done by human
causes. But if we can make if we can
heal humanity, if we can awaken humanity
to its true purpose and its true
destiny, then
the animals have nothing to fear from us
anymore.
>> Yeah. And I and I like the idea that
perhaps the rest of creation is kind of
egging us on here, you know, that
there's help to be had from
>> the trees, from
>> the the the more the natural systems
that
>> I think so, too. They're on our They're
on our side and they they want us to
succeed.
>> Yeah.
>> So, how do you see all of this
resonating with the teachings of Jesus
as as you understand them? Like
>> what was he about? And then,
>> you know, like what has the church got
wrong [laughter]
in in in how it
>> how it you know, disseminates his
message? I just just to say I was um and
connected to to what you're saying I was
rereading today the um a quote by Annie
Dillard about you know we shouldn't be
wearing straw hats and scars to church
we should be wearing crash helmets
>> because that that would be the more
appropriate headgear you know like
>> this story is big and
>> uh yeah we we we
>> we take it too lightly.
>> Yeah.
>> So yeah, back to Jesus. What what what
do you reckon he was? What was he what
did he get? What was he
>> what was he in in in understanding of?
>> Jesus was my first spiritual teacher. He
was my first mentor. Uh and as I came
into conscious awareness as a child,
Jesus was the embodiment of the highest
ideals that I saw that that I aspired to
that I could see there. Later, you know,
I've taught world religions for most of
my professional life. So I was going
around the world every year teaching of
the other great spiritual teachers from
the world and I came to understand the
collective patterns of all of their
teachings. Uh but for me Jesus
well
what did the early church get wrong?
Oh, they did such a good job trying to
capture the significance of Jesus's
teaching in history given the available
concepts that they had at the time. So
they developed a christologology that I
think was their best sincere effort to
represent the significance of this man
in history. Now I don't think that
Christologology worked. I think there's
a kind of a deeper richer
christologology that can give us easier
access to his impact. I tend to see
Jesus as an old soul as they would see
in India that through reincarnation,
reincarnation, reincarnation, uh we
become more open, absorb more and more
of our divine nature and manifest more
of that divine nature until eventually
there are certain beings that radiate
the divine so powerfully and so clearly.
We use a different set of vocabulary to
describe them. We describe them as as
arahants. We describe them as
incarnation of the divine principle. The
Hindus have this vision. Uh even
Buddhists have this vision that you know
a great being a mahasida great being
incarnates
with such a profound accumulation of
wisdom and and access to the power
divine power that it just spills over
them. It radiates from them and
naturally they are so grounded in a
deeper experience of life that naturally
they speak differently. They don't talk
about the things that ordinary people
talk about and they don't think the way
ordinary people do and they challenge us
and lift us to the higher potential
that's present in all of our natures. So
I think of Jesus as uh the firstborn of
the Christians and as leading us by his
embodiment of the prototype of what all
of us can be if we commit ourselves to
it. But it's an actualization which may
have a key trigger point in this
incarnation. But it's an actualization
which is developed and accumulated over
many many lifetimes subsequently. We are
constantly growing toward the
actualization that Jesus embodied.
That's the way I also see the Buddha as
a great soul, a great being alive within
his context and Muhammad and Lasu and
the other great teachers as great beings
who arise in our midst and help us
actualize our own potential for
greatness. Help us wake up to these deep
and profound truths. Yeah. He shook
things up, didn't he?
>> He shook things up. I mean, I'm thinking
of was it was it Gandhi who said, "I
think Christianity is a great thing.
It's just a pity. It hasn't been tried
yet." [laughter]
>> Yes.
>> And and I mean, again, I was brought up
with with such a um
uh a set view of it all that this is the
way, you know, God is, you know, the
same yesterday, today, forever. This is
it. It won't change. And and this is how
this is the model we have to to follow.
And yet
>> this conversation as well as others I'm
having is introducing the idea that even
Christianity can evolve.
>> It does.
>> I mean it has and of course we can see
in small ways how it has but but that
maybe there's a big
>> shift. All the religions of the last
axial age all the religions of the world
today the major religions all came into
existence during what scholars call the
axial age. You know 3 to 5,000 years
ago. Three to 5,000 years is only a
blink against 3.7 billion years of the
evolution of the universe which is going
to be continuing for billions and
billions and billions of years more. So
no philosophical or theological or
religious system can even the ones that
touch deeply into profound truths are
going to be able to capture the full
potential the full intent of the
evolving genius of the universe and the
divine intelligence that's manifesting
itself into the universe. So that it we
should expect that every religion is
going to have a an explosive beginning a
profound u midsequence and eventually
it's going to come to a point where like
an old person it's going to become less
resilient uh in its capacity to mediate
the power of creation, the power of
evolution, the power of spirit. and that
we should expect there to be an
upsurgence in time of a new spiritual
impulse that will better take us into
the next chapter of the human story. You
can't cover the entire human story with
one religious tradition. No matter how
true it is, it's just
>> we're involved in a process which is far
far too big for that. That's my
>> one window. Yeah. Well, I mean that
brings me on to the subject of your your
sense of the future human
>> and I've I've watched some of your
podcasts and and you're always very
moved when you talk about this. So So
can you tell us a bit about that? You
know, what is what's your sense of what
the next thing is?
>> Well, you know, I began my psychedelic
work with a certain model for what I was
doing. And the model was the model of
personal transformation. I saw myself
going through facing confronting my
shadow uh facing my faults, letting
those go, being healed, maybe even
becoming enlightened or becoming
spiritually awakened. But it was a
personal transformation process.
After a few years, that model collapsed
because I was increasingly drawn into
the species mind in experiencing a a
purification
of some aspect of the heartache and the
pains that live within the collective
psyche which are much much bigger and
more potent than anything which lived in
my personal psyche. And then from there
it it went continued to go deeper and
deeper. But one of the things that truly
surprised me, caught me completely
offguard was that a series of visionary
experiences began to be dropped into me
over the course of a number of years
about humanity, about where humanity is
in its evolutionary journey, about a
turning point that we're coming to. a
profound and exciting uh pivot in our
evolutionary story which would was so
profound it would show me that it would
constitute a true before and after mark
in in human history and when I say these
were visions
in psychedelic space you learn by
becoming what it is you're learning so
you don't view it from outside and so
these visions are not out visions which
you kind of see so much as they are
visions that you become. So when I say I
was given visions of this transition
that humanity was going through what I
mean at a deeper level is that I became
humanity undergoing these profound
pivots in in history. time opened up
into what I call deep time.
And it's it showed me that this we were
coming to this turning point that there
was this profound spiritual awakening
that was not primarily focused on
individuals. It was focused on the
entire human family. But nowhere did it
give me any understanding of how it was
going to pull this off. And I looked
around me and I didn't see the the means
by which we could do this.
>> It's not looking likely, is it?
>> No. Most people walk around in mall
consciousness, you know, it's like,
>> but then in 1995, so this we're talking
a long time ago.
>> It took me into the experience of what I
call the great awakening. It diluted it
diffused me into the entire species mind
so that I Chris Bash was gone and I was
living.
>> I know this sounds absurd, but those who
haven't psychic experience, yeah,
they'll understand. I was operating as
the human species and in that process I
went through a deep death and rebirth. I
went through an historical sequence of
events which I experienced not in detail
but in their fundamental impact on human
existence an unraveling a a a decline a
shattering of ci our civilization as we
know it. A deep loss of control of life
as we know it. a a deep unraveling.
And just when it was at its worst, and
it looked like this might be an
extinction event, the worst passed. And
then the storm seemed to recede. And
human beings began to pick themselves up
and to reather themselves. And when they
did, they discovered that they had been
profoundly changed by the crisis that
they had gone through. The whole era was
sused with a new understanding, a new
set of values, a new common sense which
crystallized new social forms, new
insights that were creating a new
culture, a new civilization. And I along
the way there and in later sessions I
came to understand that this
transformation was so deep that it
really constituted
uh the next iteration in our
evolutionary journey what I call the
future human that is it wasn't simply
simp a change in our philosophical
posture or change in politics our
economy our our productivity models. It
was a change that reached so deep that
it actually created a shift in the plate
tectonics of the collective psyche. This
was a shift at the very core of the
collective psyche, Jung's collective
unconscious. So that all beings born
after this shift takes place will be
born within the field of a different
collective psyche than we are living in
and out of. Now,
>> so I was given some experiences in later
years
of being able to just experience this
future human, the form of this future
human. And it was overwhelming, just
beauty beyond measure. A healed human
heart, a heart, the human heart healed
of all its past wounds of wars and
traumas and tragedies. a mind that was
open, able to take in more deeply um
insights and inspirations from the
divine consciousness and just with a
memory open to our full incarnational
history with an an open a compassion
that was rooted in our history having
been all the races of the world, all the
the jobs and and careers that fill
humanity, all the religions of the
world. were part of our own historical
makeup and and that unleashes a profound
compassion and for the human for the
human race.
>> In another series of sessions, the kind
of getting in deeper into the nuts and
bolts of the future human. This is what
I call the birth of the diamond soul. I
had believed in reincarnation and
understood the evidence for it for many
years. But in this experience, in this
one session, my former lives began to
start coming into me very fast. And it
was like wrapping string around a kite
school. And the more lives were wrapped
around and wrapped around until
eventually they seemed to hit a critical
mass and they fused. They fused into one
into a singularity. And when they did,
there was an explosion of diamond light
from my chest. Just an extraordinary
explosion. And I was catapulted into a
state of awareness where I was an
individual but not an individual with
any frame of reference I had ever known.
I wasn't Chris Bash but I was an
individual.
And then the teachings that came with
this experience were teaching me this is
where reincarnation is taking humanity.
It's not just incremental improvements
and you know changes that we make bit by
bit becoming hopefully more
compassionate, more intelligent. uh so
on and so forth bit by bit until we
reach some type of minimal threshold of
spiritual awakening rather that there
comes a time in this constant ex we die
we expand into the soul we're born we
contract into individual private
identity we expand we die we expand we
contract into ego we expand into spirit
we contracter or later if you keep this
up long enough sooner or later the soul
our true spiritual identity which
encompasses all of our former lives
altogether and everything we were in
between our former lives. That identity
[clears throat]
is born inside our incarnate existence.
So from that point on we no longer think
of ourselves as hundredyear-old beings.
We know ourselves to be hundred,000y old
beings. And when we look out at the
world we see other beings as hundred,000
year old beings. and we feel our
connections with them, our historical
connections with them. So that I I I
believe the future human, we don't have
to look to sci-fi and any exotic, you
know, fantasies about the what the
future human will be. All we need to do
is understand the processes of creation.
We have to understand that reincarnation
is the higher octave of evolution.
Evolution evolves whole species.
Reincarnation evolves individuals within
certain members of certain species
within all members of certain species.
But it's all part of nature's bountiful
creativity of amassing more and more
experience that activates deeper and
deeper functions which are built into
the form that we are. And I think
humanity is coming to a time when we are
going through a transition where the
diamond soul, our spiritual
consciousness is breaking through and
waking up inside all of humanity. And I
think that we are entering a dark night
of the soul, a dark night of our
collective soul. In mystical traditions
there, all of them agree before you
awaken into full mystical re
realization. There comes a period of
very very deep purggation, purification
where you must confront everything about
you which is holding you back. All the
little you know nickel and dime shitty
little things which are holding us back.
And as you let go of those things, you
reach go so deeply till eventually you
go through a death rebirth process. And
this they call the dark night of the
soul. And it's a hard it's a hard
process for most mystics as they go
through this. I think we're going
through a dark night of our collective
soul. This is going to be excruciatingly
difficult for the human family. But it
is like labor. It is truly a labor. You
know, gestation is long, but labor water
breaks. It's short and it's intense.
It's dangerous. We have been building
the future human for thousands and
thousands of years. Now it's time to
give birth to that being inside time and
space. We are entering this period of
intense labor where we have to cease to
become one type of being and start to
become a new kind of being just like a
baby is a water being and becomes now an
air being, an air breathing being. And I
think humanity is going through that.
And I think that all the great religious
teachers of the Jesus's and and the
Buddhas and the Muhammads of history
have all been in a way teaching the
teachings that are preparing us and
helping us make this transition of
awakening into our full divine
consciousness.
>> So many things sparking off. couple of
kind of small things thoughts that um
one is I'm thinking of the scripture
that says um you know I will replace
your heart of stone with a heart of
flesh
>> which seems to me echo kind of echoes
what you're saying that this is what
what we're all undergoing.
>> Yeah. Um, also that there's something it
what's happening is a is an is
accumulation of everything that was
passed, but together it creates
something new.
>> A bit like my my partner who's here on
the call was a chemist. So, it's some
some kind of, you know, you put
chemicals together and something new
happens. Um,
>> yeah.
>> Uh, and I'm so not a scientist. That's
as far as I can go with that. Um, what
was the other thought? I was thinking
about Einstein. I I I was traveling in
Europe last week with my daughter and we
went to Einstein's apartment in Burn.
Yeah.
>> Um where he worked in the patent office
there and discovered his what general
law theory of relativity.
>> Um but I'm and it was when I was reading
your book I was also reminded that he I
think he's known for saying that we only
use 10% of our brain. Mhm.
>> So I'm wondering a whether psychedelics
kind of let us into more to a little bit
of that 90% that's unused, but also
whether the future human is living is
sort of living there or it's it's lying
in wait. The the rest of our capacity
um is sort of lying in wait for this to
happen. I think it is and it's lying in
weight because it's been again gestating
for thousands and thousands of years and
so in some way you might think of it as
it is inside us the way our future life
is inside a fetus as it's coming to
maturation it's there it's being
activated uh and it's coming into being
uh yeah I I think very much that yeah go
ahead
>> yeah and then and then it occurs to me
that life offers us these opportunities
to practice practice this in a way.
>> Yeah.
>> And and it gets brings me to the
question of suffering. So we you know
most of us will undergo some version of
suffering in our lives
>> and and it it's it's crap and we
wouldn't ask for it and we wouldn't want
it for anybody that we love but but it
also is an opportunity to reassess and
repprioritize and you know think about
life in a slightly different way. So it
seems a small way of practicing for this
bigger
>> uh evolutionary kind of shift.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but so the question of so the
question of suffering because it is the
one that trips everybody up isn't it?
and and thinking about the the pattern
of suffering in Jesus's life, the
passion, you know, his passion.
>> And
>> yeah, just opening up that subject, you
know, how does how does that
>> how is that a kind of a blueprint for
something that the whole of
>> creation is undergoing? That makes
sense.
>> That's a huge question and it's one of
the driving questions that took me into
this work. Why is there so much
suffering? What is the story of
suffering? and and we have different
theologies to try to explain it and
basically most of them fail but we just
have to continue to try to answer this
question and what I'm going to say here
is surely incomplete and and is doesn't
capture the whole of it when I have I
think to understand why there is so much
suffering in existence not just for
humanity but for all the other life
forms around us and not just suffering
which we create which is human-made
suffering, but suffering which is kind
of indigenous to being a human.
Suffering suffering that comes at us
through life without any fault of our
own. Why?
>> And in the universal system in the in
the in the you know in the in the
structures of the earth.
>> Yeah. And hurricanes and avalanches and
>> earthquakes
>> and earthquakes and children who are
born without their entire neoortex. I
mean just all with all sorts of genetic
abnormalities. Why is it so so hard
here? And the best I've been able to
understand this, first of all, it's not
that we're being punished. It's not that
we've done something fundamentally
wrong. We've entered a state of original
sin and we deserve this. Everything has
happened to us. I don't think that's
really to the issue. The best I've been
able to understand it is that you you
have to be willing to look deep into
existence and you have to be able to
look long.
If we think of the mind of God, the mind
of God doesn't think small. It thinks
doesn't think in terms of just
individuals. It thinks in terms of whole
species. It thinks in terms of galaxies.
It thinks in in huge spans of time,
billions of years, not tens of years or
hundreds of years. And if we if we want
to complain and think we could have done
it better if we were God. We could have
created a better earth with less
suffering and a better life for
conditions that assumes we understand
what God is trying to bring about. We
understand we have a mil a model of what
we are what the whole exercise is about.
And I think if we articulated that we
probably only get 10% of it of what's
emerging in history. I think there is a
magnificence to the human project to
what a human being is becoming. If we
make this transition to the future
human, it's only going to be the next
step in a long series of steps and it
will be followed by next steps and next
steps and it it's hard to even imagine
what what is being shaped by the whole
developmental trajectory and to create I
think what is emerging in history. It
takes time. I mean it it our vascular
system is predated by the vascular
systems that developed in trees and
plants. Everything about us takes time
to develop. And so much of what we we
assume in our species was prototyped in
the life of chimpanzees and other ma
mammals and other plant forms. So it
takes time to learn to control and
exercise the power that we have that we
have built into us and to exercise its
manifestation in the world.
It's it's like if you're building a
house and you've got the stud walls up
and the truss is up, but you haven't put
on the roof yet. Well, then you can
expect when it rains you're going to get
wet. But it doesn't mean that
something's wrong with the house. It
just means it's unfinished. And I think
the human race is profoundly deeply
unfinished.
And that the pain is part of this being
unfinished. It's part of the the Russian
roulette quality of genetic variability
and and historical variability.
The the question to me is not primarily
is there random chance in the universe.
I think there can be random chance. A
lot of the things we think are random
maybe are not random. But I think there
can be chance. The key issue is does the
creative intelligence of the universe
pay attention and take into account how
we respond
to chance? How we respond to suffering?
Whether it's intended or accidental, is
it paying attention? Are we growing from
it?
I think
>> you Sorry.
>> Go ahead. Yeah, go ahead. you made you
made some suggestion in your book that
um suffering is is our offering to the
divine. Wonder if you might have I got
that right. Yes. When basically at a
certain point my work I was taken back I
know this sounds absurd but again I know
that psychedelic other psychedelic will
understand
>> taken back to the beginning of creation
taken back to the big bang and
experienced much to my surprise a
profound love just a love that a divine
love that just completely overwhelmed
me. I was would have expected
intelligence because of the intelligence
of that I see in the universe. I wasn't
prepared to that creation emerged out of
a profound love and that our
participation
>> Oh, Chris, sorry. I I don't know if
everybody did. I lost one sentence
there. You just went
>> for one. So, something about the divine
love.
>> Yeah. I was overwhelmed by this divine
>> Yeah. And
what I came what I was shown was that
first of all our participation in
creation is voluntary through means that
are beyond my ability to comp comprehend
that we chose individually to be here.
We chose to be part of this process and
by doing so we chose to be part of a
very unfinished process and we had
variety of reasons for wanting to do it.
And in in this unfinished existence that
we are part of there is great pain and
there is great suffering. But from this
perspective and this great pain and
suffering is so bad we think it
represents a rupturing of love that
there is no love behind it. But what I
was shown is no. Love is the
underpinning of all existence. Love is
the purpose of of existence and our
participation in creation is an act of
love. And in that respect, our suffering
as part of creation in its unfinished
state is a gift that we give to the
creator. It it's just a gift in the long
term. It's part of our commitment to
contributing to the evolution of the
future human and the future future human
and the higher and higher forms of life
which will be many many generations yet
to emerge. But we can
>> and just as as a challenge to that you'd
be happy to say that so for instance to
the people who've lost family members in
the this recent earthquake or in the
slums of India or Africa you know to get
real about it
>> I know yeah and I I you know have to be
very careful because there's many levels
to take into account here and I don't
mean to make light in of any person's
suffering either individual or
collective suffering
Not at all. Uh and yet from if we reach
deep enough and reach large enough, I
think that
this what I'm saying holds true. It's
not that these lives.
These are precious human lives. These
are these are precious human lives.
Every one of them. And their suffering
carries enormous weight in the cosmic
order of things. Enormous significance.
And because every human being and every
being alive is a fractal aspect of the
divine mind, the divine consciousness,
the divine suffers as we suffer. The
divine isn't free of suffering outside
of us. Let watching what happens down
here. The divine suffers all this pain
and suffering that human beings are
suffering.
>> And that's the theology of the cross,
isn't it? That's the
>> It is.
>> Yeah.
>> Whatever else we might think about.
>> Yeah. I wouldn't want to say that their
suffering was intended and you know and
here we have this is why I say what I'm
saying will be completely incomplete. I
mean it will be unfinished theology of
suffering. The closest I've been able to
get to understanding the enormous pain
of existence is to appreciate two
things. It's it's part of a large
project of unspeakable beauty and we
volunteer for it. I do believe that when
we incarnate, we volunteer for the roles
that we incarnate into. We we have
insight when we before we incarnate
what's going to be involved in the lives
that we're getting into and we we accept
those and we choose those over other
lives that we could have had.
Now
yeah that I know that's pretty that's a
controversial thing but if you look at
the work of Michael Newton if you look
at a number of past life therapists they
but that's one of the consistent themes
that we chose these lives and the other
thing to remember is in this system and
I don't mean this lightly I mean this
sincerely though no one dies
we die our our incarnation is cut short
yes in pain and suffering yes but the
essence of every individual does not
die. It's conserved and carried forward
and returned to spiritual existence. So
no matter what happens,
death in any sense of an ultimate final
irreversible stopping
of an individual life cycle, yes, but of
a soul, no. It's just not there.
We didn't begin. We didn't become alive
when we were conceived. We pre-existed
our conception.
>> We do not die when the body dies. Life
continues. This is a cycle in an
infinite number of cycles in a
developmental drama.
>> Okay, I've got my eye on the time. And
just to let people know in in after this
next question, we'll go into question
time. So, if you've got a question,
please put it in the chat and then we'll
either read it out or you can come to
the screen to to offer it to Chris. Um,
so yeah, we've got about three minutes
for this pro maybe the biggest question
of all. Um, so you've mentioned the mind
of God and you've also mentioned the
great mother.
So, I wonder what your your and and the
big story and the the creative
consciousness and you know, maybe
they're all different names for the same
thing, but I wonder for you personally,
>> what what is the the God that you live
with
or the divine that you live with?
Well, my divine is the intelligence that
gave birth to the universe and the
intelligence that lives in the universe.
It is inseparable from creation at one
hand and also is the source of creation
at the other hand. And I find it more
comfortable to refer to this incarnate
existence as the divine mother. In one
experience, I was taken back to the
origin of creation and I experienced
this divine love out of which creation
flowed and I experienced a primal unity
that divided into two parts. One part of
the divine stayed transcendent. The
other part of the divine inc manifests
the physical universe and was the divine
that was incarnating in the physical
universe and manifesting galaxies and
planets and life and so on.
The part that remained transient or the
transcendent divine struck me as having
a more feminine uh more masculine
quality.
The incarnating divine, the imminent
divine, the manifest divine felt to me
more of a feminine quality. The mother
generative of earth of all life. And so
for me um the divine that I serve of
course is both. And I don't think
there's really gender in the divine.
This is all labels that we use but more
narrowly the divine that
I am a servant of the great mother.
Whatever she asks is what I what I try
to do.
>> The prayer that I love is the prayer of
the shaman that says graciad gracia
madre
gracia madre.
>> Do you know the um the quote by Meister
Echart? What does God do all day? God
lies on a maternity bed giving birth
eternally.
>> Isn't that beautiful?
>> Yeah, that seems to sum up.
>> So, last minute before we hand over to
questions. Is there anything here that
we've not talked about? I'm sure there's
I'm sure there's lots we haven't talked
[laughter] about.
>> There's lots we haven't talked about. Is
there anything you'd really love us to
have, you know, for you to have brought
in and and offered us? Well, I'll just
mention that in the last chap in the
introductory chapter of the book, the
last issue I deal with is how much
suffering there is on the book. And I I
wanted to caution the reader about that
because I had to make a a real careful
decision how much of this suffering to
let people see. And it's the type of
suffering that comes up in any spiritual
practice. It's just part of the dynamic.
And the logic is really simple.
As we are, we are small. If we actually
want to have experience of that which is
large, we have to surrender our
smallness and allow ourselves to be
opened into that which is large within
us. And the suffering is simply the
process of shedding skins, shedding
habits, shedding conditionings so that
we can move into deeper and deeper
intimacy with these larger patterns of
life. And because it's there are many
many layers to existence, there are many
layers to the shuffling of patterns,
dropping off these patterns and
constrictive patterns. And that's just
part of the mystic path. That's part of
any spiritual path. And it's part of the
spirit of the psychedelic path when it's
used in a self-consciously spiritual
manner. And I I didn't want I want
readers not to be afraid or not to be
put off or not to be come to think that
the universe is somehow of uh wants us
to suffer or that that suffering has
some inherent value or you know not at
all. The universe wants us to be
nourished. But [snorts] if we want to
understand what's truly going on if we
have to allow ourselves to become large
and that means we have to be willing to
let go of what's small. Now for some
people this is very easy. Teresa of
Vavila she had she came to full mystical
flourishing when she was like 15 16
years old. She hardly had a dark night
of the soul of the all. She had it in an
earlier life. Teresa Vavila her dark
night of the soul lasted
decades a lot of dark and a lot of
suffering and then she came into her
full mystical flourishing. So there's
many ways in which we enter into that.
And so some people might enter the the
psychedelic path and just move
effortlessly right into the light and
right into divine ecstasy. And that's
fine. That's perfectly fine. For me, it
took a little few more hard bumps.
>> Well, yeah. And mine mine has has taken
a turn recently. I I my first
experiences have pretty much been
beautiful. Not not in their entirety.
There's been some grief and
>> sense of the suffering of humanity down
the ages and of and of all creation.
>> But but my last couple of experiences
have just been suffering and I I haven't
worked out yet whether it's my body
saying
it doesn't want me to do this anymore or
if I'm being taught something I I you
know and I need to try again carefully
um to see what what where that takes me.
Um but yeah, it can be difficult to
know. It is after going through after
working for two and a half years, I
entered a two-year period of extreme
suffering. U it's so suffering that I
came I called it the ocean of suffering.
>> Well, I was interested that you kept
going.
>> I did. And and it was because you don't
just have suffering, you suffer and then
you yield to it. It takes you where it
wants to take you and then there's a
culmination where you move through that
suffering for the day and you enter into
ecstatic teaching, ecstatic bliss. So
it's not just suffering, it's suffering
which leads to ecstatic understanding
and ecstatic experience. And you learn
that rhythm. It's it's a purification
process, a purification. And the deeper
the purification, the deeper the
ecstasy. But what I came to understand
is that that suffering was not coming
from my personal being. It wasn't coming
wasn't personal karma. It wasn't
personal impurities. This was something
which may have begun by an individual.
But the suffering was being lifted out
of the collective psyche of humanity.
There was a way in which I was mediating
an extrication and offloading of some of
the painful memories that were lodged in
the human species. And I think that this
shows up in mystical traditions all
around the world and it shows up on the
cross. This is in essence, you know, the
image of the cross is someone who lays
down their life for the sins of the
world. You know, that's the essence of
it.
>> Yeah.
>> I think maybe I have something more to
learn about surrendering to it.
>> So many lessons and so many
>> So many lessons. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Chris, thank you. I've so enjoyed this
so far. Um and uh I'm going to hand over
to Megan um at least to to sort of
moderate the questions. Is that okay?
>> Uh yeah, happy to. Um we'll start with a
few questions from the chat. Um and then
if you have a question that you'd like
to ask Chris or Annette directly, just
raise your digital hand and I'll call on
you to unmute. Um so we'll start with a
question from Glenn. Um, how do you,
you've talked about the father and the
mother. Um, how do you understand the
Holy Spirit in the context of
psychedelic experience?
>> Well, once again, um, I've studied so
many different cosmologies in the
world's religions and seen so many
different creedle formulations. I take
all of them with a certain grain of
salt. I think they are attempts to
articulate powerful archetypal dynamics.
uh and I I don't dismiss any of them. I
take them all seriously. Uh and in the
Christian tradition, the trinitarian
formulation is trying to understand two
things. The relationship of of Jesus to
the divine father or the divine oneness.
What is that relationship?
And
that understanding of that relationship
gave birth to an understanding of the
Holy Spirit, which is both the
continuation of the power of Christ
after Jesus's body is gone. And it's
also kind of a living dynamic of our
individual relationship to the higher
God the Father or the higher source of
all existence. So it's it's not human.
It's represented by light. is
represented by a bird but it's it's not
human. Jesus is human, divine human. The
father is transcending of human and that
dynamic relationship. [snorts]
So to me the Holy Spirit is not so much
about a being. It's about the life of
the divine that runs through all
existence. That that runs through every
being that's alive. Every ant, every
bird, every human being. It is that is
the life of of the divine that runs
through all things. That's how I relate
to it.
>> Thank you, Chris.
>> I heard the field the the field or the
soup that we swim in.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's like the air we breathe
>> recently that um the trinity is the
particularly Christian way of holding
duality and non-duality that we
>> um yeah our unity and our relationship
and
>> that's a good way of putting it. Yeah.
Why didn't I think of that? [laughter]
>> I think you did. I was just summarizing.
Um let's see. Um so you mentioned
earlier that uh the reason you focus on
the human is that we're such a threat
right now. Um but there's a question in
the chat which um is is pushing a little
further on um you know would it not help
to heal if we saw the family relations
and the more than human world um as uh
as part as really central to our
relationality.
I want to pull back a little bit um
and maybe frame it this way. Um is there
something that you think is unique about
the the human in the place of the
cosmos? And I'm thinking, you know,
Buddhism says, "Hey, you've you've hit
the jackpot if you got a human birth."
And we think of concepts like the world
tree in terms of
>> humanity's place in the universe. So
yeah, just wondering how you hold the
more than human world with the
specialness of being human. Yeah,
first I I want to say that um I have
friends who are serious psychedelicists
and they have done tremendously powerful
healing work with animal and plant
kingdoms and they've received many
blessings from animal and plant kingdoms
and I think that can be a very powerful
part of working with psychedelics is to
open yourself up to this family which is
bigger than the human family and even
bigger bigger than the earth family but
just keep it just on earth that we are a
member of this family and the shaman
comes out of psychedelic trans and
shouts all my relations the cry that
comes from the heart all my relations
that's a powerful affirmation of the
oneness of all existence and and that's
a very healing thing so in terms of what
is a human role in all of this I tend
not to think in terms of uh uniqueness
makes us special you You know, that's
kind of like left-handed people are more
special or less special than
right-handed people or uh you know,
we're more special
>> more special. And and see, one of the
things that psychedelics do has opened
me up to such vast expanses of time and
vast expanses of space. And it makes me
very sensitive to the fact that we have
two trillion plus galaxies in the
universe that we've know of. uh that
we're counting and we have billions of
stars in each galaxy and thousands and
thousands of suns of planets around some
of these stars. So I just assume that
there's a plurality of life forms. And
so anything that we might measure what
is unique about a human being on Earth,
it just pales into insignificance
against the the manifold quality of life
throughout the entire universe. So I
just would focus it more down in terms
of what have my what has my uh
my animal lineage, my earthly line
lineage, my plant lineage on earth, what
have all my family members given to me
have built into me, into my body and
into my psyche, into my heart and soul
that now I'm responsible for taking it
and using it and giving back to them and
taking it that one step forward. If this
makes me unique, my uniqueness is pales
into insignificance. I think when I look
at all that we share in common with
the world of the for-footed and the
two-leggeds and and the winged creatures
and the finned creatures of the world.
It's just I love to see the family as a
much more complex, colorful family that
I'm proud to be part of.
Yeah, it almost sounds like you're
saying that if there is any uniqueness,
it's in our responsibility to be in
relationship. I don't know if you would
say that.
>> Yeah, I I think that's true. I mean, my
my experience is that the essence of my
being is the divine is divine. And the
essence of every other being in
existence, no matter how large or how
small, is actually the same. It is the
divine. The Hindu term is atman, essence
of the individual is Brahman, the
essence of the totality. That's true for
everything. And when one experiences the
essence of your individuality deeply,
you experience a profound oneness with
all of life. Right now, you're
responsible for living with that
awareness and bringing it into form as
best as you can. And so uniqueness maybe
is is is unique in sense it reflects
your experience. the depth of your
spiritual experience. Now, can you bring
this forward and bring it into the
world?
>> Thank you. Um, Peg, you have your hand
raised. You want to unmute?
>> Sure. Hey, thanks so much. It's great
great to be here with you, Chris, and
everybody else. Uh, my question really
focuses on your most recent uh second
edition of the living classroom. Uh I
think it's it's a it's a brilliant
update on your first book uh really
talking about collective intelligence
particularly in the psychedelic space. I
know you weren't doing psychedelics in
the classroom. You were noticing a
collective intelligence that was
happening in the classroom while you
were doing psychedelics individually
even though the students didn't know
that. However, you update that in the
second edition. My question is really
this is um I'm I'm in Vancouver and I'm
part of a a nonprofit that's running
group psychedelic retreats. We have done
about 1,300 people through our model
now. Um and we have two clinical trials,
one in Canada and one at Exit University
looking at collective intelligence in
group psychedelic journeys. Our model
preps people for eight weeks and then
brings them and drops them all into a
group space doing psilocybin. I haven't
seen anything close to what I'm
experiencing in the groups that I've
seen in all of the individual therapy
and I've done hundreds. When people trip
in a group, something dramatically
different happens. There's a stabilized
field that gets created that I don't
know how to put words to and no one's
doing research on it. The only people
I've seen talk about it is Rupert
Sheldrake is Morphic Resonance and your
book Living Classroom. No university has
studied group psychedelic trips. And yet
I think what I'm seeing in the lab
because I've seen it 1,200 times now is
absolutely brilliant because it
stabilizes the nervous system and allows
people to go to a level of depth
spiritually and psycho psycho wise that
they can't do on an individual
therapeutic level with their therapist.
Can you comment on this because I don't
know how to explain what I'm seeing and
you're one of the only people that have
ever written on it.
>> Yeah.
Well, thank you for your kind words for
my work and I think you're absolutely
right and it's psychedelics are
irrelevant to this process, but when
they're introduced, they potentiate this
process because psychedelics are simply
amplifiers of consciousness. So what
we're looking at is the very nature of
consciousness itself, whether
psychedelics are involved at all. So
groups generate an energy field.
>> Individual mind fields are affected by
the energy of a group field. And when
you then amplify this group field, let's
say with just drumming or you amplify it
with repetition. So you meet every week
for five years. And so this energy
getting stronger and stronger. A
newcomer into this group is impacted not
only by the energy formed by the people
in the room tonight. But it's impacted
by the morphic field which is
accumulates all the learning of all the
people who have been entering this group
and creating these experiences and
contributing to the morphic field of
this group. This is very powerful and
all spiritual traditions have recognized
this. All spiritual traditions recognize
that when an in when individuals
practice together, when they enter into
prayer together, when they say the
rosary together, when they meditate
together, there is an energy which is
greater than these individuals kind of
practicing by themselves separately. So
that that energy accelerates our
individual development, accelerates our
u dropping of our resistance and
entering into deeper rapport. And that's
that's all I'm really pointing to in the
in the living classroom. I'm pointing to
two things. The energetic resonance that
was triggered between myself and
individual students that states of
consciousness are contagious.
Heightened states of consciousness,
awakened states of consciousness are
contagious just like hate is contagious
and violence is contagious. The second
thing is that groups generate collective
fields and these collective fields
actually outlive the group that
generated them. So my students are
disappearing semester after semester
after semester but courses my courses
were creating fields that were
persisting and getting stronger year by
year. So what we're looking at is a
whole new kind of quantum psychology, a
whole new of appreciating the ways in
which intentionality in groups can be
focused and potentiated not to suffocate
the individual but actually the irony is
it liberates individuality because uh
when an individual is activated by the
group, it actually brings out their
creativity. It brings out their their
individual potential to greater
fulfillment.
Yeah. Oh, that's beautiful, Chris. Thank
you so much.
>> That's really awesome work you're doing.
Thank you.
>> Yeah. And I'm uh I just I just love that
you are at least giving us uh some words
to understand this because again we've
we've understood group dynamics and as
you're right every rel religion has a a
sa or a church or a communal practice
that we all know is so important for
these spiritual traditions but we
haven't we haven't really scientifically
framed that in the psychedelic group
space you know uh and that's kind of the
work that I'm trying to do right now is
really give some language for what's
happening when we when as you said prime
it when we don't just drop in on a
Friday night a bunch of Iawaska people
we don't know but we build community
together and then drop into a heart
space with these medicines so thank you
so much Chris for your work I I I just
really appreciate your what you're doing
>> thank you my honor
>> can I can I jump in here just to say
that um when I take off my leg hat I put
on a different hat um to do with um
cristic psychedelic retreats and we've
been leading um legal retreats in the
Netherlands with groups. We've done been
doing it for three years now and I'm I'm
really interested. I think we're doing
something really interesting and
important. I'd be really interested to
talk to you more Peg and to Todd who's
just put us something in the chat who's
working in ex I think there's Yeah, I I
resonate absolutely with what you're
saying.
>> It's what what we're finding. We do we
do all of that prep.
um and then do the retreat and then do
integration together and then have an
ongoing community and some of whom are
here tonight. So
>> yeah.
>> Yeah. Megan
>> Josh, would you like to unmute?
>> Hi Chris. I'm Josh.
>> Hi Josh.
>> I had a music question about one of your
sessions
>> in um session 42. You listened to
Jesus's Blood Never Failed Me Yet.
>> Yeah.
>> And question. [clears throat]
>> You mentioned that it carried you into
several hours. So, did you Was it just
listening to the album one time through
and then having it carry over or was it
a song on repeat or
>> I looped it?
>> You looped it. Okay.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Powerful powerful uh piece
of music.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I want I wanted to ask about your
choice of that as well. M
>> what what I found in basically um
and I learned working with music from
early Stan Grath literature and some
early essays that were written uh by
Bonnie u I can't remember last name
Helen Bonnie and uh about how to pace
psychedelic sessions and what kind of
music you want to use in the beginning
the middle the end so on so forth um And
I found that music is very powerful uh
especially if you're working with a very
powerful psychedelic like LSD and
evocative psychedelic. Um I found that
uh music supports the undifferentiated
um engagement. It allows you to ride the
forces that are rising up within you to
ride them and let go of your
conventional ways of thinking,
conventional ways of of feeling and
hearing. So you're never using music
that's familiar. You're always using
music no English in it. And it should
come I found it more powerful if it
comes from nonwestern cultures because I
was very familiar with psychedelic
modalities and tempos but I used
indigenous music with foreign cadences
and foreign languages. they were foreign
in its very foreignness is very helpful
because it just allows you to submit to
the foreignness of the situation that
you're entering. But I found that music
became u impregnated with too much
experience and I could never use a piece
of music more than about three times. So
I was always looking for music to
refresh my repertoire and going into
more sessions. And so that's how I kind
of wo in all sorts of different music
from different cultures, always keeping
the library fresh.
>> Thanks. I also want to say this has been
a great gift because it's my birthday
today and I'm looking forward to the
first one and it got rescheduled for
today. So this is great. Thank you so
much. Plus it's the full moon tonight as
well. So that's awesome.
>> All right. Double blessings. Happy
birthday Josh.
>> I knew there was a reason that this got
postponed. [laughter] Our
next question is from Todd. Um, let's
see. Chris, in your continued sharing of
the widest understandings of being, are
you finding increased resonance with
those not fully open to both your
methodology and the implications?
That's part one. And in part two is are
you okay with uh sharing with Tar Desard
the designation pilgrim from the future?
>> Pilgrim from
>> pilgrim from the future.
>> Pilgrim from the future.
[laughter]
>> Well, I always when when I start to
answer a question, I'll lose track of
the other one. So, I'm going to answer
the second one first and then you'll
have to remind me of the first part. Um,
you know, I take refuge in some ways in
u Black Elk because when Black Elk was
10 years old, he had this visionary
experience where he was given visions of
the fate of the Lakota people. And so he
was a 10-year-old boy and it scared him
so badly he didn't talk about them for
years. But he wasn't from the future,
but the visions were from the future.
And it was they were entrusted to him to
share with the people. And in this
respect, I mean, I'm not a future being,
but I've been given a certain experience
of future events, what really feel to me
not like projections and not like
fantasies, but they feel to me rockhard
experiences of a highly probable future.
Um,
and so they live in me and they have
they have made me
both a stranger and a friend to my
present time in history because
most people don't have knowledge of
future events and if you have knowledge
of future events um that's not something
you can share with many people.
Now to the first part I think if I
remember it I have found more and more
people and not necessarily limited to
psychedelic people interested in having
the kind of conversations that I want to
have because of my psychedelic
experience. About almost half the mail I
get around uh my work comes from people
who will say something like I've never
done psychedelics but I know exactly
what you're talking about. I've had a
serious contemplative mis meditation
practice for 40 years and it's taken me
into some of the same territory. So some
of the people who write are very
psychedelically experienced, some of the
people are not but very spiritually
experienced. But what we all have is a a
hunger and a longing to understand the
deeper processes of life and the deeper
dynamics of of our lives and our deeper
nature. And that that's a shared thing.
I also think that I have found that s
I thought that the tremors of this
unraveling were probably going to take
place after I died and I [snorts]
wouldn't be part of it. But now I think
in the last 10 years I've seen that
these tremors are beginning. We're only
in the early stages. But the shock
waves, the destabilization, the
questioning of traditional values, uh
the kind of attack on the fundamental
structures of our civilization that and
the rejection of science, the rejection
of knowledge and therefore the
postponement of adaptive change and the
intensification of the confrontation
with change and global climate change
that this is signaling that these
processes are starting. were a long way
from their reaching their peak but they
are starting and I think other people
are aware of this too. They they they
sense that there is a profound
instability of foot in the land and
therefore when I speak about the
instability of the dark knight of our
collective soul they say ah that makes
sense that this is part of a deeper
unraveling and it's it's an unraveling
which has a positive outcome if we can
see it through to completion. It's not a
meaningless unraveling. It's not just a
brutalization of life.
There is a deeper work of foot. And they
respond to the idea that there is a
deeper work of foot and that they can
positively contribute to this work. This
is our calling as in our higher calling
as human beings at this time in history.
All of us, I believe every human being
alive, chose to be alive at this time in
history, knowing to some degree what was
coming, what was happening. And they
chose to be part of it. And then when
they hear somebody invite them to that
understanding, it touches a nerve in
their memory. They understand and they
they choose to be part of it
consciously, not just unconsciously. So
I find Yeah. a a greater receptivity.
Yeah.
Thank you,
>> Chris. Thank you for joining us. This is
another question. Um, uh, in reading
Diamonds from Heaven, I was interested
to hear that many of your journeys took
place while married, yet your spouse was
not interested or not supportive of this
journey. Yeah,
>> I'm not sure how many of your journeys
were solo or in a group, but I'm curious
to get your perspective about how solo
versus group journeys with a spouse can
impact the experience, particularly in
the transpersonal domain.
>> Yeah. All of my what I consider my
serious work, the LSD work, all of that
work was solo work. I mean, I was always
attended by my wife who was a clinical
psychologist. She was a sitter and took
care of me during all of those sit
settings, but I was working solo. In
other contexts, I've done Iwasa work
with groups, with communities. I've done
psilocybin work with other partners,
later partners. Uh but in the 20 years
when I was doing my psychedelic work,
Carol, my wife then, uh she wasn't
didn't feel a calling to do this work.
She was a natural mystic in a way. And
subsequently she has after our
separation after 25 years of marriage
she has completed her three-year
solitary retreat under the teaching of
under her teacher uh in Santa Fe. So
she's a serious uh meditative
contemplative a serious practitioner but
she just wasn't the psychedelic path did
not call her and I have great respect
for her spiritual wisdom and her
spiritual presence. [snorts] Um, so I
think it's important that we we follow
our own calling. I mean, I I followed
Carol into Vadriana Buddhism and I
learned many beneficial practices from
Vadra Vadriana Buddhism. I drew many
practices from my Christian background
in in my years uh in Catholic tradition
and years in the seminary
and I've worked in groups and
individually and each of them has a
certain advantage and a certain set of
disadvantages. The advantage of working
in groups is the intensification of the
group field and the natural community
and being able to share your experiences
after it's all over. And that sharing is
really important and that's not
something I had when I worked as an
individual. The advantage of working as
an individual is that you could have
individually tailored sessions where you
could go as far and as deep as you had
the capacity to go and you didn't have
to hold back because of limitations in
the room. [snorts] U the disadvantage is
it's a solo act. It's a solo journey and
I didn't have a community where I could
share my experiences afterwards. And I
found cumulatively that became a real
burden uh to have to not be able to
share the most important deepest
experiences of your life.
That weighed in my on my heart. Uh and
it was only really with the publication
of darknet early dawn when I began to
teach in California and have access to
graduate students who were
psychedelically initiated. But
especially when I wrote uh LSD in the
mind of the universe and I basically
came out of the psychedelic closet and
began to be invited to have
conversations like the conversation
we're having today that all of that
weight fell away because now I'm able to
be who I am completely. I am a a
professor and I'm a psychonaut and I
don't have to hide that anymore.
Lindsay, I will do um Lindsay's question
and then I'm going to read one more from
the chat before we close out. Unless
something really juicy gets into the
chat, I can't resist it. So, Lindsay, go
ahead and unmute.
>> Hi, Chris. I've read some of your book
and um really have enjoyed it and I've
been really excited about this today.
Um, I kind of have a two-part question.
The first part of it is maybe what
practical advice or recommendation can
you give us in light of what you've
talked about today? Like maybe the next
step um of what we should kind of do
moving forward. Um,
and then the second part of this is
actually in regards to like special
needs. you actually brought up briefly
um maybe someone that has like a part of
their cortex that hasn't fully
developed. I was just curious like what
role do you think special needs
individuals play um in this idea of the
birth of the diamond soul and
reincarnation?
>> Yeah.
Well, let me again start with the second
question and I may ask you to remind me
of the details of the first question
because I got so focused on it.
>> Yeah. Um
I don't really have a a I think a
competent answer to that question. What
what is the what is the role or what do
special needs individuals uh give us who
are working in a psychedelic or
spiritual space? I think all human
beings are special needs individuals and
special needs special special needs
individuals offer us an opportunity to
learn from them, to learn from their
special uh the way their mind works, the
way their bodies work, maybe to be uh
more compassionate, maybe to help them,
but to learn from them. And so, but so
do my neighbors who are not identified
as special needs, but from some
perspectives, you could say they're
special needs. they challenge us and
they require us to be flexible and
adaptive and uh to honor them to each to
honor them their own particular uh
journey in life. So other than that I
don't have a really good answer to your
question other than that generality.
And in terms of advice moving forward, I
I'm you I'm thinking about whether the
advice that you're asking about is
internal to a session or in life outside
of a session. I'm going to guess you're
talking about in life outside of a
session. Is that right? Do you think
>> we can? Yes, that's I'd love to hear
what you have to say with that.
Again, I think
the way I understand life is we chose
the life that we incarnated into. And
this life has a certain h probability, a
life script. Uh that's what I learned
from all reading all the volumes that
I've read on past life therapy. is a
life script, not a not a definitive
deterministic outcome of events, but a
series of probabilities and potentials
and allies that are kind of embedded in
the script of our life. And to me,
the most difficult the the real
difficult question is not what should I
do. As I become more aware, as I see the
the the challenges arising in history,
the most difficult question is not what
should I do. The most difficult question
is will I have the courage to do what I
know can be done. And that's a matter of
sort of looking around and owning your
life, owning the potential which is
built into your body, into your mind,
and into your circumstances.
What is at hand? What is that allows you
to do? make a significant contribution
to this world.
And my sense is if we're willing to make
that to have the courage to to do what
we can do, then we'll find plenty to do
because our choice planted us in the
middle of opportunities to make those
contributions. I'm a teacher. I'm not a
doctor. A doctor would have doctor
opportunities to make this contribution.
A politician has politician
opportunities to make a contribution. a
great athlete has great athlete
possibilities to contribute uh to this
whole movement. So it's it's really a
matter of looking for the hidden
resources that are buried in your life
and in your circumstances and asking
yourself what is it that feels most
resonant with me with my deepest causing
calling and then having the courage to
pick it up and get to it. And if it
doesn't work out or you change your mind
and you find that there's something even
better later, go and do it. Change it.
Do it later. Yeah.
Thank you for the questions. Really
>> Thank you so much. I really liked your
answer. Thank you so much.
>> Okay, I'm going to read this from John
and then end on some words of thanks.
Uh Chris, you and I have communicated
before. This presentation helped me to
understand much better your experience
what your experience has revealed than
my reading of your book. Deep thanks for
your work. My own experience of 25 years
allows me to track your narrative and to
resonate completely with it. And so I
think that expresses what a lot of us
here are feeling today. I want to thank
um Chris, both you and Annette for um
really working in a spirit of service to
those who are exploring psychedelics uh
in the way that you lead, in the way
that you share your wisdom from a place
that is grounded and um and cognizant of
the burdens and the sufferings of this
life and uh not avoidant of them. So,
thank you for bringing that in today.
Thank you. I thank that questioner very
much for their kind words and kind
thoughts. And I I do want to say and I'm
sure Annette would feel the same way.
It's an honor. It's a true honor uh to
be of service in this way.
>> Yeah. And thank you from me. This has
been a pleasure, a privilege, and I've
just enjoyed it. So, thank you.
>> Yeah.
Go forth into the world in peace. Be of
good courage. Hold fast that which is
good. Render to no one evil for evil.
Support the faint-hearted. Uplift the
weak. Honor all people. Love and serve
the Lord. Rejoicing in the power of the
Holy Spirit and the blessing of God
Almighty, the creator, redeemer, and
sustainer bless, preserve, and keep you
this day and forever.
Everyone, thank you for joining us. Have
a lovely day. Look forward to seeing you
next month.
>> Okay.
>> Thank you. Byebye. Bye
>> everybody. Much love.